Okay, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to lecture nine.
Uh, we're going to talk about Bayesian modelling today.
NOTE CONF
So far in the course we've introduced a number of
approaches for building computational models of cognitive processes.
NOTE CONF
Initially we saw rule based models, grammar based models.
For example, the, uh, the model that generates past tense
NOTE CONF
forms based on a lexicon and a set of simple
rules.
NOTE CONF
Then later on, we looked at neural network models, which
are in some sense on the other extreme.
NOTE CONF
They generate an output just by generalising from input patterns.
So they combine a powerful learning algorithm, very general learning
NOTE CONF
algorithm with a lot of data essentially.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Then last time we briefly looked at the role of
probability in learning.
NOTE CONF
And today we're going to generalise this and look at
a framework that essentially combines symbolic aspects and sub symbolic
NOTE CONF
aspects, combines rules and probabilities.
And in particular we're going to look at a paradigm
NOTE CONF
called Bayesian modelling, which been which has been popular over
the last 10 or 15 years in cognitive modelling.
NOTE CONF
Today I'll introduce the foundations and I'll try to, uh,
to give you an intuition of what's going on in
NOTE CONF
Bayesian modelling.
Then in the next lecture on Thursday, we're going to
NOTE CONF
look at one particular model in quite a lot of
detail.
NOTE CONF
And then we will return to probabilistic modelling also next
week when we look at other domains than language, when
NOTE CONF
we talk about decision making and biases in decision making
and so on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you haven't already, please, take a moment to
NOTE CONF
scan the QR code, which we'll need later on in
the course.
NOTE CONF
So just give you a few seconds to do that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Wait.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so don't worry.
The QR code will be back.
NOTE CONF
And all right, so we'll introduce some fundamental concepts to
do with Bayesian modelling called posteriors and priors.
NOTE CONF
We'll introduce Bayes rule, which is sort of the main
formula that we use.
NOTE CONF
And you might be familiar with that from probability.
If you've done some probability and then we'll look at
NOTE CONF
two examples.
These are not cognitive models.
NOTE CONF
They're just conceptual examples to do with reference resolution and
simple decision making.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll introduce the concept of Bayesian update, which
is what you do when your information changes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Just to quickly recap, um, we have seen, uh, various
NOTE CONF
ways in which during acquisition, in particular language acquisition, children
are able to infer information from their environment.
NOTE CONF
So here, for example, we have a speaker who says
three koalas.
NOTE CONF
And maybe there's also pictures or stuffed toys of koalas.
The child initially doesn't understand, but then hopefully is able
NOTE CONF
to map this onto some sort of counting routine, say
when they're learning to count.
NOTE CONF
And we'll come back to that in the next lecture.
So in general, they observe an input and infer the
NOTE CONF
underlying cognitive technology.
Be it language, be it counting, be it certain other
NOTE CONF
visual concepts, and so on.
We'll talk about concepts in general next week as well.
NOTE CONF
So in this case, I listen to speech and infer
the underlying words.
NOTE CONF
And more generally, you can think of this as an
experiment.
NOTE CONF
You start with a set of beliefs and then you
observe some evidence, some data, and use this to update
NOTE CONF
your beliefs.
And this sort of constant process of updating is how
NOTE CONF
we can model learning.
Last time we've already looked at a particular type of
NOTE CONF
probabilities.
Transitional probabilities, which is a transitional probability, is the probability
NOTE CONF
of a word given the previous word, or in general,
is the probability of an event y conditioned on the
NOTE CONF
existence or occurrence of another event x.
And today we will generalise this and look at what's
NOTE CONF
called Bayesian belief updates.
Okay, so we'll start with a very simple experiment.
NOTE CONF
Here's a mysterious box.
And the idea is for you to guess what's in
NOTE CONF
the box.
And you can do this on on wall club here.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, you also given the dimensions of the box.
Uh, 15 by 22 by eight centimetres.
NOTE CONF
Here's another picture if you want to see the box
again.
NOTE CONF
And.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
So sorry.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Please just vote.
NOTE CONF
What do you think is in the box?
I think that's.
NOTE CONF
What?
This.
NOTE CONF
Is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
I was like.
NOTE CONF
Okay, give you another 30s.
Okay, let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can see, well, it's pretty evenly distributed.
NOTE CONF
Some people think it's a book maybe candy.
Hope abstract noun.
NOTE CONF
I'm not quite sure why this is here.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Schrodinger's cat is also an abstract concept.
Smaller box seems to be popular, but in the absence
NOTE CONF
of any more information other than the size and maybe
what the box looks like, it's really hard to guess.
NOTE CONF
So this, uh, state of absence of information, or sometimes
you have some information.
NOTE CONF
You know that, for example, something really big cannot be
in the box.
NOTE CONF
This is called a prior.
So in the absence of data or evidence.
NOTE CONF
What can you assume?
This is called a prior.
NOTE CONF
And now let's assume that you actually get some more
information.
NOTE CONF
So.
We can draw this as a distribution right where you
NOTE CONF
have your hypotheses book can be carried and so on.
And the x axis and the probability which we'll call
NOTE CONF
prior probability on the y axis.
And now let's say we want to get some more
NOTE CONF
evidence some more information about the box.
So for example we shake it and there's a does
NOTE CONF
this even work here.
There's a little video here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is actually my colleague Frank Mollica.
NOTE CONF
Shaking the box.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's enough.
And.
NOTE CONF
Now you get a vote again.
Okay, so we have this new evidence obtained by providing
NOTE CONF
by doing a small experiment.
Checking the box.
NOTE CONF
What do you think is in the box now?
So please vote again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
I think.
It's okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So Candy is now suddenly very, very plausible things like
a scarf maybe wouldn't make that sort of noise.
NOTE CONF
A book maybe would make a slightly different noise, a
smaller box maybe would make a similar noise, depending on
NOTE CONF
its size.
And nothing definitely can be ruled out, right, because of
NOTE CONF
the noise and so on.
So the probability distribution, if you look at this as
NOTE CONF
a probability distribution, has changed quite dramatically based on the
evidence.
NOTE CONF
And this is this new distribution is called the posterior
distribution.
NOTE CONF
And we can compare.
Let's see if this actually works okay.
NOTE CONF
Not use this feature before okay.
So you can see how your distribution has changed from
NOTE CONF
initially relatively evenly distributed across the different options to 68%
candy okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's try to formulate this slightly more mathematically.
So what we've seen is we now have a new
NOTE CONF
distribution called the posterior distribution.
This is this is not your distribution.
NOTE CONF
It's just one I made up.
And the important thing is that the prior distribution green
NOTE CONF
changes.
Once you have the evidence and you get the posterior
NOTE CONF
distribution in red.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The the set of hypotheses that called hypothesis, so-called hypothesis
space remains the same.
NOTE CONF
But the probability is assigned to these hypotheses, i.e. the
distribution changes.
NOTE CONF
And mathematically we can express this in a simple formula
called Bayes rule or Bayes theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, if we have the probability of a hypothesis h
given some data D and data is any kind of
NOTE CONF
information you can get regarding your hypotheses.
So in this case, we shook the the box and
NOTE CONF
we heard a certain noise.
So that would be our data.
NOTE CONF
So the probability of the hypothesis Hypotheses.
Say book or candy?
NOTE CONF
Given your data, that's p of h given d, and
this can be computed as the probability of the data
NOTE CONF
given the hypothesis times the overall probability of the hypothesis.
This is called the prior probability, and this is called
NOTE CONF
the likelihood divided by the probability of d the probability
of data.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this term here p of h given d is
NOTE CONF
called the posterior.
So what do you believe about the hypothesis once you've
NOTE CONF
seen the data.
This inverse term p of d given h.
NOTE CONF
So that's the probability that if your hypothesis is true.
So there's really candy in the box.
NOTE CONF
It has generated this noise.
In this case it's probably fairly highly highly probable that
NOTE CONF
it has generated this clicking noise.
If there's candy in the box but if the box
NOTE CONF
is empty then the probability that it's generating this noise
is zero, right?
NOTE CONF
So this is the probability of the data given the
hypothesis, also known as likelihood.
NOTE CONF
And this is the probability of the hypothesis a priori
without any information.
NOTE CONF
This is called the prior probability or prior beliefs.
And this was your initial distribution, right?
NOTE CONF
When I didn't tell you much about, uh, about the
hypothesis, then you could essentially guess that certain things are
NOTE CONF
a priori without any evidence that plausible or implausible.
But other than that, you didn't have enough information, and
NOTE CONF
then the probability of D, the probability of the data
or the evidence, uh, this is how likely it is
NOTE CONF
to hear this noise independent of the hypothesis P of
D is actually not so important because it's constant, right?
NOTE CONF
It's not dependent on the hypothesis.
So the important terms here are the likelihood and the
NOTE CONF
prior.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is all pretty abstract.
And what is this actually good for.
NOTE CONF
Let's do a small calculation to.
Oh, sorry, I forgot one other bit.
NOTE CONF
So the P of D.
If you want to compute this, you can actually break
NOTE CONF
it down as follows.
You can break it down by summing over all possible
NOTE CONF
hypotheses and taking the likelihoods and the price of those
hypotheses, and computing the posteriors.
NOTE CONF
And then if you add them up across all the
hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
So in this case it would be can be a
smaller box, nothing, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Then you get P of D.
However what people sometimes do is they just ignore p
NOTE CONF
of T and then this becomes a proportional to rather
than equal to, because often we only care about the
NOTE CONF
most likely hypothesis.
We don't care about the probability of that hypothesis.
NOTE CONF
And then of course, dividing by a constant p of
t is the same for all hypotheses doesn't make a
NOTE CONF
difference.
We'll see.
NOTE CONF
We'll see an example of that.
Next time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now we have everything we need.
NOTE CONF
Bayes rule.
And then this simple formula, which allows us to compute
NOTE CONF
the probability of the data.
This is also called marginalisation.
NOTE CONF
This process.
And this can be a problem if the hypothesis space
NOTE CONF
is really big.
You can have an infinite hypothesis space for example.
NOTE CONF
Then we have a problem with computing p of d.
But in this case it's in the example.
NOTE CONF
We'll see it straightforward.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at this example.
Reference resolution.
NOTE CONF
Reference is when people refer to something with language right.
So if I say the dog then I can point
NOTE CONF
to a dog.
I can refer to a particular dog or with a
NOTE CONF
pronoun.
Pronouns also have reference.
NOTE CONF
If I say he or she, then I refer to
a person I've talked about earlier.
NOTE CONF
So this process is called reference.
And here we have a toy example where we will
NOTE CONF
see that the kind of inference that we can make
using Bayes rule allows us to formalise this problem of
NOTE CONF
reference resolution.
Okay, let's assume we have a game.
NOTE CONF
You have these three smileys here, and you are allowed
to choose a single word to refer to one of
NOTE CONF
the smileys, let's say the middle one.
So how would you how would you do this?
NOTE CONF
How would you pick out a particular smiley so that
the hearer.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You're talking to someone, you say for example, glasses so
NOTE CONF
that the hero can pick out a particular smiley easily.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Unambiguously.
So that is the game.
NOTE CONF
And obviously in in reality you won't have smileys.
You will have more complicated objects, you will have lots
NOTE CONF
of different objects, but still you have the problem of
referring to the objects, right?
NOTE CONF
If I refer to this telephone, it's easy, I say.
Telephone.
NOTE CONF
There's only one.
If I want to refer to a student in the
NOTE CONF
room.
There's a lot of students in the room, so I
NOTE CONF
need to be much more specific with my reference.
Okay, so that's what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so and if we think about this in Bayesian
terms a priori, if I say a word, then the
NOTE CONF
listener can assume that all the smileys, all the three
smileys are equally likely, right?
NOTE CONF
There's no reason to assume that I'm more likely to
refer to the middle one, as opposed to the left
NOTE CONF
or the right one.
So we have a prior that makes everything equally likely.
NOTE CONF
However, once I say my word, I've provided evidence.
So we treat this word as evidence.
NOTE CONF
Just like when we shook the box.
We took this as evidence regarding the information of what's
NOTE CONF
in the box.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if you draw these bar charts again, then here
is what's going on.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume the words that you can utter is
glasses smiling or hat.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you you start with the same prior in
NOTE CONF
each case left centre right smiley all equally likely.
So a probability of a third.
NOTE CONF
And now you have your evidence.
Let's say you say glasses.
NOTE CONF
This smiley doesn't have any glasses.
So the posterior probability of that is going to be
NOTE CONF
zero.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because the likelihood that I say glasses, given that the
smiley is doesn't wear any glasses is zero.
NOTE CONF
And these two are equally likely because both smileys wear
glasses.
NOTE CONF
So that's the probability of 0.5.
Intuitively, if I say smiling well all the smileys are
NOTE CONF
smiling, so that is not very informative.
My probability distribution remains the same.
NOTE CONF
All three of them are equally likely.
If I say hat right, only the right one wears
NOTE CONF
a hat, so the left one and the centre one,
the probability becomes zero because this.
NOTE CONF
The the data hat is impossible given the hypothesis left
or centre.
NOTE CONF
But the right smile is the only one with the
hat, so the probability becomes one.
NOTE CONF
So this is the intuition that's going on.
And it's a similar intuition to the one with a
NOTE CONF
box.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We start with a probability distribution that is there in
the absence of any evidence.
NOTE CONF
And here we just assume everything is equally likely.
Then we get some data, some information, some evidence.
NOTE CONF
This is just a single word you're saying.
Glasses smiling or hat.
NOTE CONF
And based on that, we can now figure out which
of the smileys is being referred to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we go from prior to posterior.
NOTE CONF
And how do we go from prior to posterior.
Well, we have our little formula here, right?
NOTE CONF
We have Bayes rule, and we can use this to
work it out.
NOTE CONF
And we'll do this now numerically just to to make
sure that it actually works.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's look at one example where the, the word that's
NOTE CONF
being spoken is classes.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we go from this prior distribution to this posterior
distribution.
NOTE CONF
Bayes rule which I've written here just slightly differently because
h and d I use this to indicate individual hypotheses
NOTE CONF
rather than sets of hypotheses, but the logic is exactly
the same.
NOTE CONF
So we have the probability of a hypothesis.
And these are our hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Left centre or right right.
Remember I've called this the hypothesis space the set of
NOTE CONF
all possible hypotheses given the data.
And the data is that we hear the word glasses
NOTE CONF
okay.
So we start with the probability of the data given
NOTE CONF
the hypothesis our likelihood Times the prior probability times the
probability of the data which I've written here.
NOTE CONF
Using this marginalisation formula that we've been given here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now let's put in the numbers to see if
it works.
NOTE CONF
So H is our hypothesis which smiley I'm choosing.
These are our data.
NOTE CONF
Which word I'm uttering or hearing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the probability of the data given the.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Let's look at the left smiley.
NOTE CONF
So hypothesis is left.
So this smiley here.
NOTE CONF
And now we need to look at the probability of
the data given the hypothesis.
NOTE CONF
The probability that I will say glasses given this smiley
is zero.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because this smiley doesn't wear glasses.
NOTE CONF
So that probability is zero.
The prior of our hypothesis is just one over three.
NOTE CONF
Because we have three hypotheses.
We're assuming they're equally likely.
NOTE CONF
So this is zero times a third.
And so we don't really care about the denominator here
NOTE CONF
because it's you know, zero by a number.
It's still zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the probability zero for the left smiley.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at the centre smiley here.
This one here up there.
NOTE CONF
So this smiley does wear glasses.
So the probability that we hear the word glasses given
NOTE CONF
the hypothesis the centre smiley is one.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Assuming if there's glasses then this the probability of saying
glasses is one.
NOTE CONF
And then the prior probability is still a third.
And here we're summing up the other probabilities.
NOTE CONF
So zero times a third, one times a third.
And also for the right smiley one times a third
NOTE CONF
right.
These are these are the three hypotheses left centre and
NOTE CONF
right.
So this is Says one third over.
NOTE CONF
Two thirds is one half.
Okay, so the probability after here in the word glass
NOTE CONF
is for the centre smiley is one half.
And for the right smile is exactly the same computation.
NOTE CONF
It's also one half.
So this is confirming our intuition that initially before hearing
NOTE CONF
any evidence, we don't know which of these smileys is
more likely than any other.
NOTE CONF
So they're all equally likely.
Once we know that they're wearing glasses, only the centre
NOTE CONF
and the right one are left over.
And these are in turn equally likely because we don't
NOTE CONF
have any more information.
So they're both 0.5.
NOTE CONF
The posterior probability is 0.5.
If we then heard another utterance say hat, then we
NOTE CONF
could in turn eliminate this possibility.
And the probability here on the right would go up
NOTE CONF
to one.
Okay, so we can update our probabilities as more information
NOTE CONF
becomes available.
This is called Bayesian update and we'll see that in
NOTE CONF
a moment.
But first there's another quiz.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is sort of very quick check that you've
NOTE CONF
been paying attention.
We've introduced all these terminologies.
NOTE CONF
Uh, posterior beliefs likelihood, prior belief evidence.
Can you match it with the with the right mathematical
NOTE CONF
expression?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So H is our hypothesis.
D is our data our evidence.
NOTE CONF
Oh, my.
Gosh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
20s.
NOTE CONF
Only half the class is voted so far.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
Mm.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So evidence.
NOTE CONF
P of d and probability of the data.
Prior beliefs p of H is also correct.
NOTE CONF
Posterior.
And then you have to.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Probability of hypothesis given the data and probability of the
NOTE CONF
data given a hypothesis.
So the inverse probability is the likelihood and I'll just.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Most of you have figured it out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So here's a slightly more difficult question.
NOTE CONF
What if you don't have any prior information.
And actually we've seen we've seen a case like that
NOTE CONF
in the reference example.
If you don't know.
NOTE CONF
You know what your hypothesis space is, right?
So your set of possible outcomes, possible hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
But you have no information about, uh, about these hypotheses
and how likely they are.
NOTE CONF
So what happens then is the probability of h zero
for all hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Is the probability the same for all hypotheses?
Or you are in the unfortunate position that you can't
NOTE CONF
use Bayes rule.
Okay, let's have.
NOTE CONF
A look.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's the correct answer.
So the probability is the same for all hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
This is sometimes called a uniform prior right.
Because it's a uniform probability distribution that assigns the same
NOTE CONF
probability to everything.
If the probability was zero that would be unfortunate because
NOTE CONF
then our posterior would be zero as well.
Then we couldn't really do anything.
NOTE CONF
But we've already seen a uniform prior.
So in the in the smiling example right.
NOTE CONF
So here three outcomes.
Each of them is a third in terms of probability.
NOTE CONF
So that would be a uniform prior.
Whereas in our in our box example the prior was
NOTE CONF
not uniform.
I mean there wasn't a lot of variation.
NOTE CONF
But here, for example, we have a lower prior probability.
So we don't have to have a uniform prior.
NOTE CONF
And actually in general.
In some sense there is no point in using a
NOTE CONF
prior if it's uniform, right.
Because it doesn't add any information.
NOTE CONF
And we will look at more interesting priors.
Well, actually in the next example, but also in the
NOTE CONF
next lecture on Thursday.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the rest of the lecture is really a complicated
example.
NOTE CONF
Another example of an application of Bayes rule.
Before we get there.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions.
Now it's a good point to ask any questions.
NOTE CONF
No.
Everything clear?
NOTE CONF
Everything unclear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So this is an example.
Nothing to do with linguistics.
NOTE CONF
This time is a decision making example, and we'll talk
more about decision making and more formally also about biases
NOTE CONF
in decision making next week.
But here's a small example to start with.
NOTE CONF
So this is a holiday kind of scenario.
Peter and John are on vacation in a country where
NOTE CONF
they don't speak the local language.
The city that visiting has awesome hot springs with monkeys,
NOTE CONF
and they want to go to the hot springs.
So this, I don't know, could be Japan.
NOTE CONF
Unfortunately, the hot springs do not allow clothing, so they
have to bathe naked.
NOTE CONF
And Peter is really shy about bathing with women.
Unfortunately, no.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Fortunately, the hot springs have one day a week for
NOTE CONF
men only and another one for women only.
And?
NOTE CONF
But the place is low tech.
There's no signage.
NOTE CONF
You cannot find out easily which day is for men
only.
NOTE CONF
So Peter has an idea to solve this problem Every
day they'll go to the spring and see which people
NOTE CONF
are coming out.
And then based on that, they will try to infer
NOTE CONF
whether it's men only, women only, or mixed day.
And obviously this is an inference problem.
NOTE CONF
And it's a problem where you use data, right.
You have an observation.
NOTE CONF
You can see who's coming out of the bathhouse.
And so Bayes rule is basically a great way of
NOTE CONF
making this inference.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And in order to try to apply Bayes rule, the
first thing you need to do is think about your
NOTE CONF
hypothesis space.
Hypothesis space is the set of possible outcomes that you
NOTE CONF
want to draw inference over.
So here it's fairly straightforward right.
NOTE CONF
There's only three possible states.
One is it's a women only day.
NOTE CONF
The other one is no restriction.
And the third one is a men only day.
NOTE CONF
And basically Based on these set of hypotheses and some
clever assumptions about the prior and some data that we're
NOTE CONF
observing.
We want to figure out which day it is with
NOTE CONF
a certain probability.
Right.
NOTE CONF
That's what Bayes rule allows us to do.
So let's first think about the prior.
NOTE CONF
How can we work out the prior.
Well there's one day per week.
NOTE CONF
Women only one day per week.
Men only seven days in the week, of course.
NOTE CONF
So that means our prior should be something like this.
Women only.
NOTE CONF
It's one over seven men only the same one over
seven and no restrictions five over seven the other five
NOTE CONF
days.
Okay, so we don't have a uniform prior.
NOTE CONF
We have a prior that gives us some information, namely
that it's a lot more likely to have an unrestricted
NOTE CONF
day than women only or men only day.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's already useful for drawing this inference, right?
In the absence of any information, we have to assume
NOTE CONF
it's most likely that this day has no restrictions.
Let's assume, you know, the two guys go to the
NOTE CONF
spa and watch who's coming out and they see a
man coming out.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So now we can, uh, compute the posterior probability using
NOTE CONF
Bayes rule.
And for that we have our prior.
NOTE CONF
Prior is the same as before.
And we have a likelihood term.
NOTE CONF
So if it's a woman or women only day then
the probability of seeing a man is zero.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we know the likelihood there.
NOTE CONF
If it's a day that has no restriction, then the
likelihood of seeing a man or a woman, let's assume
NOTE CONF
is the same, same number of men and women go,
if it's a man only day, then the likelihood of
NOTE CONF
seeing a man is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because that's the only possible outcome.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now we have prior likelihood.
So we can plug this into Bayes rule.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
Sorry, I confused myself.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I'm looking at the two outcomes here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the likelihood of seeing a man and the likelihood
seeing a woman, given the hypothesis.
NOTE CONF
One, 2 or 3.
So, um, the.
NOTE CONF
If it's no restriction, the likelihood of each of the
outcomes is one half.
NOTE CONF
If it's women only, then likelihood of men is zero.
And likelihood of woman is one.
NOTE CONF
And for men, it's the other way around.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now based on this, we can produce our, uh,
we can compute our prior.
NOTE CONF
So just to remind you, the probability of a hypothesis
given the data, where the data is our observation, Who's
NOTE CONF
coming out of the the spa is the probability of
the data given the hypothesis times the probability of the
NOTE CONF
hypothesis divided by the probability of the data.
So let's compute this product up here first likelihood times
NOTE CONF
prior.
This is sometimes called the posterior score because it's not
NOTE CONF
a probability yet right.
To make it a probability we need to divide by
NOTE CONF
p of d.
So this is simply the product of the prior and
NOTE CONF
the likelihood.
So in the first case zero times one seventh is
NOTE CONF
zero one half times 5/7 right.
So there's no restriction is five over 14 and one
NOTE CONF
seventh times one likelihood is one.
If it's a man only day is one over seven
NOTE CONF
okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Now we need to turn this into a probability.
And for that we need to compute the probability of
NOTE CONF
the evidence here p of d in the denominator of
Bayes rule.
NOTE CONF
So and here we take all the possible outcomes.
H right.
NOTE CONF
H1 h2 h3 times the probability of the of the
h and then the likelihood of the h.
NOTE CONF
So this would be.
This here is obviously zero.
NOTE CONF
This is five over 14.
This is one over seven.
NOTE CONF
This is seven over 14 equals one half.
So that's the probability of the data.
NOTE CONF
So we can plug this in here into Bayes rule.
And now we get our posterior right.
NOTE CONF
It's the women only day.
The posterior is still zero.
NOTE CONF
No restriction is five over seven and men only is
two over seven.
NOTE CONF
Note that these are now probabilities right?
They sum to one, whereas the posterior score is not
NOTE CONF
a probability.
Okay, so two over seven I don't know.
NOTE CONF
Should they go in?
That's about 28%.
NOTE CONF
So it's not a very high probability.
They're not very certain that this is a man only
NOTE CONF
day.
This is basically what this tells you.
NOTE CONF
It's 70% or 72% probability that it is a mixed
day.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So what to do in this case?
NOTE CONF
Well, now we can do what's called a Bayesian update.
So a single observation isn't a lot of data isn't
NOTE CONF
a lot of information.
And so how about waiting for a bit longer.
NOTE CONF
See if more people come out.
And then hopefully you can make a more certain inference
NOTE CONF
about what day it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So they wait another five minutes, five more men come
out.
NOTE CONF
Peter wants to be 90% sure that it's men only
before they venture into the spa.
NOTE CONF
So should they go in?
Or should they wait longer?
NOTE CONF
Is this 90%?
Have they already achieved the 90% or not?
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the same game prior probability remains the same.
One over seven five over seven one over seven.
NOTE CONF
The likelihood of seeing five men and it's a women
only day is of course zero still.
NOTE CONF
And the likelihood of seeing a man in a unrestricted
day is a half.
NOTE CONF
And in men only day is one.
And so now, of course, we have six pieces of
NOTE CONF
evidence in total, right.
Previous observation and the five new observation.
NOTE CONF
So to get the probability, we need to now multiply
this likelihood by itself six times.
NOTE CONF
So in the case of zero that's zero to the
power of six times the seven is still zero.
NOTE CONF
But here for the no restriction it's one half to
the power of six times the prior five over seven.
NOTE CONF
That's five over 484.
And then for the posterior for men only day, the
NOTE CONF
likelihood was one.
So that's to the power of six is still one
NOTE CONF
times one over seven is one over seven.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are the posterior scores.
These are not probabilities yet.
NOTE CONF
We need to normalise them by the probability of the
data.
NOTE CONF
So for that we add this and this.
And this is 69 over 480 448.
NOTE CONF
And we can now compute the posterior by taking our
posterior score and dividing it by this.
NOTE CONF
And so the probability of H2 given the data is
now 0.072.
NOTE CONF
And the probability of h3 only given the data is
0.9 to 8.
NOTE CONF
So around 90% sure that this is a man only
day.
NOTE CONF
It could still be a fluke.
It's a mixed day and six men came came out,
NOTE CONF
maybe a group or something like that.
But if our criterion is that we want to be
NOTE CONF
90% sure, then these six observations are sufficient to draw
the inference that it's H3 with 9,093% probability.
NOTE CONF
Approximately.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
I'm running early.
NOTE CONF
Any any questions?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So why is this called Bayesian update?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we started.
We started with a certain posterior here based on a
NOTE CONF
single observation.
This is not really an update yet.
NOTE CONF
This is just a fixed set of data, and I
want to work out what the probability of my hypothesis
NOTE CONF
is.
And then.
NOTE CONF
However, in a lot of situations additional data becomes available.
So for example you're talking to someone and you keep
NOTE CONF
talking.
So you get more and more information.
NOTE CONF
So you accumulate this information.
And let's assume you want to figure out whether that
NOTE CONF
person is friendly or not.
The more information you have, the more reliable your inference
NOTE CONF
will be.
So you start out with, let's say 50 over 50
NOTE CONF
chance that someone is friendly or not.
But then the more they say, the more certain you
NOTE CONF
are.
One way or the other, right?
NOTE CONF
So you update your beliefs continuously as more information becomes
available.
NOTE CONF
Or for example, you are casting a die and you
want to find out whether the die is, uh, Is
NOTE CONF
fair or not, right?
From a single throw of the die.
NOTE CONF
You.
You cannot tell.
NOTE CONF
But you probably have to assume that it's fair.
So your prior would be one over six.
NOTE CONF
But you keep rolling the die and so you acquire
more and more information, and ultimately you are able to
NOTE CONF
draw the inference whether the die is fair or not.
So this is another example of Bayesian update.
NOTE CONF
So in here what's going on.
We could in principle whenever someone comes out of this
NOTE CONF
bar we can recompute our our posterior.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So we take the previous posterior we add another bit
of information.
NOTE CONF
So as you can see here it's just a product
that becomes longer and longer the more observations we have.
NOTE CONF
And the likelihood is the same in each case.
It's also imaginable that the likelihood can change from one
NOTE CONF
observation to the next.
But here we're just assuming the likelihoods are all the
NOTE CONF
same.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this process of updating your beliefs as more and
more information becomes available is called Bayesian update.
NOTE CONF
And it allows you to model this process that we
become more and more certain about a certain decision or
NOTE CONF
about a certain inference.
The more information is available.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So to summarise, we've seen Bayes rule as a way
NOTE CONF
of calculating the probability of a hypothesis given some evidence.
For that we need first of all a hypothesis space,
NOTE CONF
which is the set of possible hypotheses that we can
consider in this case.
NOTE CONF
In the first example, there were three different smileys.
In the second example, there were the the different days,
NOTE CONF
three different days.
But the hypothesis space often can be quite large, sometimes
NOTE CONF
can even be infinite, makes the computation more complicated.
So we'll see more complicated examples like that later on
NOTE CONF
in the course.
And then in Bayes rule you compute the posterior, which
NOTE CONF
is the probability of the hypothesis given the data based
on the likelihood which is the inverse, the probability of
NOTE CONF
the data given the hypothesis.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume your hypothesis is true.
How likely are you to observe this kind of data
NOTE CONF
and the prior, which is the probability of the hypothesis
being true a priori in the absence of any evidence.
NOTE CONF
This computation of the priors, sometimes also called Bayesian inversion,
because, as you can see, you invert the direction of
NOTE CONF
the conditional from hypothesis, from data given hypothesis to hypothesis
given data.
NOTE CONF
Then you have the evidence which is here in the.
In the denominator and basically makes this product up here.
NOTE CONF
Probability.
If you don't care about this then you can, uh,
NOTE CONF
you can get rid of the P of D, right?
If you just want to know what's the most likely
NOTE CONF
hypothesis, then you don't need the denominator, right.
Because dividing by a constant will not change the order
NOTE CONF
of the hypotheses.
But here, for example, we wanted to be sure that,
NOTE CONF
uh, there's 90% probability, uh, offers off a given hypothesis.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So there we need to divide by the p of
t, otherwise we won't get a probability.
NOTE CONF
So that's the probability of the evidence.
So in the intuition is the prior encodes the information
NOTE CONF
we have without any observations without any evidence.
The likelihood encodes the information that we get from an
NOTE CONF
observation.
If we assume the hypothesis is true and then the
NOTE CONF
posterior is is a way of combining the two okay.
And that is a very powerful concept that we can
NOTE CONF
assume that there are some knowledge that we know before
any data could be innate, right?
NOTE CONF
Depending on what we're modelling.
And then there's a knowledge that we get from observations.
NOTE CONF
You know like the the this is partially rationalist, partially
empiricist.
NOTE CONF
Um, in in a neural network model, you would assume
nothing is innate.
NOTE CONF
You would only work with the likelihood.
If you have a sort of rule based approach, then
NOTE CONF
everything would be in the priors.
Everything would be given to you without evidence.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the posterior is the result of combining the two
NOTE CONF
and recomputing the posterior.
If we get more evidence, this is called Bayesian update
NOTE CONF
because oftentimes in a cognitive task, the situation is dynamic
changes, more evidence becomes available.
NOTE CONF
And we need to change our hypotheses and we can
use this.
NOTE CONF
In general, Bayes rule is a way of analysing, learning
and inference.
NOTE CONF
We'll apply it to word learning in the next lecture,
and then next week we will talk about decisions.
NOTE CONF
These are decisions about possible outcomes.
Which which outcome is more favourable.
NOTE CONF
Which outcome is preferred.
And we want to model people's decision behaviour.
NOTE CONF
And Bayes rule can be used for that as well.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's all we.
Well we're a bit early.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.